Polishing to the specification (#271)
riscv-non-isa/rvv-intrinsic-doc: doc/rvv-intrinsic-spec.adoc

[,c]
----
vint32m1_t __riscv_vadd_vv_i32m1 (vint32m1_t op1, vint32m1_t op2, size_t vl);
----

In the following example, the intrinsic will produce the semantic of a `vadd.vv` instruction, with source vector operands of `EEW=16` and `EMUL=1/2`, which can be observed through provided RVV data type; and produce results to destination vector operands with `EEW=32` and `EMUL=1`.

[,c]
----
vint32m1_t __riscv_vwadd_vv_i32m1 (vint16mf2_t op1, vint16mf2_t op2, size_t vl);
----

[[control-of-vl]]
=== Control of `vl`

Direct control of `vl` (vector length register) ^11^  is not exposed at the C language level. The RVV C intrinsics provide intrinsics with a `vl` operand to indicate the active vector length valid during intrinsic execution. The compiler is responsible to set the correct value to `vl` given the informed active vector length.

NOTE: Intrinsics for instructions that behave the same with different `vl` settings (e.g. `vmv.s.x`) do not have a `vl` operand.

> NOTE: The intrinsics follow the specification ^27^ and will at most operate on `VLMAX` ^5^ elements. If a value larger than `VLMAX` is provided to `vl`, the intrinsics will operate on `VLMAX` elements. Essentially the number of elements processed will match what is returned when provided to `__riscv_vsetvl_*` <<pseudo-vsetvl>>.

Reviewer: This is not exactly correct, as discussed by @dzaima and @topperc in the PR conversation. In this case, I think it is better to say less. Here is a proposed fix.

```suggestion
The actual value written to the `vl` control register is subject to implementation defined behavior and is typically not known until runtime.
The intrinsics programmer should use the `__riscv_vsetvl_*` intrinsics <<pseudo-vsetvl>> to determine its value,
for use (e.g.) in loop stripmining logic.
```

Reviewer: On second thought, this might warrant further discussion. For known VLEN or sufficiently small AVL, the programmer might want to avoid stripmining and rely on the fact that `vl` = AVL when AVL < VLMAX. The way I've worded this might allow an implementation to pick `vl` < AVL in this case.

Reviewer: I just made an edit to my proposed fix. I'm writing this message so you see a notification about it.

== Introduction

The RISC-V vector C intrinsics provides users interfaces in the C language level to directly leverage the RISC-V "V" extension ^0^ (also abbreviated as "RVV"), with help from the compiler to handle instruction scheduling and register allocation. The RVV C intrinsics also aims to free users from responsibility to maintain the correct configuration setting ^18^ for the vector instruction executions.

> This document uses the term "v-spec" to indicate the RISC-V "V" extension specification ^0^. This document also uses the term "RVV" as an abbreviation for the RISC-V "V" extension.

Reviewer: > This document uses the term "v-spec" to indicate the RISC-V "V" extension specification ^0^

We wouldn't say "f-spec" to refer to the F-extension specification. These are ratified standard extensions of the RISC-V ISA. I think we should just say "the ISA spec" (or "specification").

Many standard extensions are developed in repositories separate from https://github.com/riscv/riscv-isa-manual , but after ratification they are merged into this document. Here is the PR to merge the (ratified) vector extension: https://github.com/riscv/riscv-isa-manual/pull/1088.

Until this is merged, it is OK to cite https://github.com/riscv/riscv-v-spec. Or perhaps cite both, with a comment in the bibliography.

> This document uses the term "v-spec" to indicate the RISC-V "V" extension specification ^0^. This document also uses the term "RVV" as an abbreviation for the RISC-V "V" extension.

Reviewer: > This document uses the term "v-spec" to indicate the RISC-V "V" extension specification ^0^

We wouldn't say "f-spec" to refer to the F-extension specification. These are ratified standard extensions of the RISC-V ISA. I think we should just say "the ISA spec" (or "specification").

Many standard extensions are developed in repositories separate from https://github.com/riscv/riscv-isa-manual , but after ratification they are merged into this document. Here is the PR to merge the (ratified) vector extension: https://github.com/riscv/riscv-isa-manual/pull/1088.

Until this is merged, it is OK to cite https://github.com/riscv/riscv-v-spec. Or perhaps cite both, with a comment in the bibliography.

Author: Adjusted wording to use "the specification" instead of v-spec.

== Availability

With `<riscv_vector.h>` included, availability of intrinsic variants depends on the required architecture of their corresponding vector instruction. The supported architecture is passed into the compiler using the `-march` option ^2,3^.

The standard vector extensions ^19^ provides a set of smaller extensions for embedded use. Please checkout the `Zve` extensions ^20^ for the varying degree of support.

For example, RVV type `vint64m1_t` and `__riscv_vle64_v_i64m1` is not available under architecture `rv64gc_zve32x`.

[[control-of-vector-programming-model]]
== Control of the vector extension programming model

The intrinsics allow users to control fields in `vtype`, and also rounding modes for fixed-point (`vxrm`) and floating-point (`frm`) vector computations.

> In this section, we cover how the intrinsics embed the control of `vtype` fields in the function names. Please see <<naming-scheme>> for the rules described in this section.

Reviewer 2: "In this chapter" perhaps?

```
vint32m1_t __riscv_vadd_vv_i32m1 (vint32m1_t op1, vint32m1_t op2, size_t vl);
```

In the following example, the intrinsic will produce the semantic of a `vadd.vv` instruction, with source vector operands of `EEW=16` and `EMUL=1/2`, which can be observed through provided RVV data type; and produce results to destination vector operands with `EEW=32` and `EMUL=1`.

```
vint32m1_t __riscv_vwadd_vv_i32m1 (vint16mf2_t op1, vint16mf2_t op2, size_t vl);
```

=== Control of `vl`

Direct control of `vl` (vector length register) ^11^  is not exposed at the C language level. The RVV C intrinsics provide intrinsics with a `vl` operand to indicate the active vector length valid during intrinsic execution. The compiler is responsible to set the correct value to `vl` given the informed active vector length.

NOTE: Intrinsics for instructions that behave the same with different `vl` settings (e.g. `vmv.s.x`) do not have a `vl` operand.

> NOTE: Intrinsics will at most operate on `VLMAX` ^5^ elements.

Reviewer 3: maybe should explicitly describe the semantics for when a `vl` argument is greater than `VLMAX`? (i.e. whether the compiler may treat it as undefined behavior, or if there's specific behavior (presumably equivalent to it being passed through a respective `__riscv_vsetvl_*`?))

Author: Added description to clarify the semantics. Please check again, thank you.

NOTE: The RISC-V psABI ^9^ states that `vxrm` is not preserved across calls. Optimization for reducing the number of redundant writes to `vxrm` is a compiler and system specific issue.

NOTE: Control to the vector fixed-point saturation flag (`vxsat`) ^22^ is not yet covered in the RVV C intrinsics v1.0. We plan to support them in follow-up versions in a compatible way with existing intrinsics in v1.0.

[[control-of-frm]]
=== Control of `frm`

For the floating-point intrinsics, representing the floating-point arithmetic instructions ^23^, the intrinsics have two variants, called the implicit-`frm` and the explicit-`frm` intrinsics.

NOTE: Control to the floating-point accrued exceptions flag fields (`fflag`) ^10^ is not yet covered in the RVV C intrinsics v1.0. We plan to support them in follow-up versions in a compatible way with existing intrinsics in v1.0.

==== Implicit-`frm` intrinsics

The implicit-`frm` intrinsics behave like any C-language floating-point expressions, using the default rounding mode when `FENV_ACCESS` is off, and using the `fenv` dynamic rounding mode when `FENV_ACCESS` is on.

> NOTE: Both GNU and LLVM compilers generate scalar floating-point instructions using dynamic rounding mode, relying on the kernel initialization to set `frm` to `RNE` (specified as "roundTiesToEven" in IEEE-754 (a.k.a. IEC 60559)).

Reviewer 2: I assume this "kernel" is the OS kernel but maybe this can be expressed more generically as the "environment initialization" because this might be actually done by the loader of the C library.

> NOTE: The implicit-`frm` intrinsics are intended to be used regardless of `FENV_ACCESS`. They are provided when `FENV_ACCESS` is on for the (few) programmers who are already using fenv; and they are provided when `FENV_ACCESS` is off for the (vast majority of) programmers who prefer the default rounding mode.

Reviewer 3: "intended to be used" → "intended to be usable" maybe?

[[explicit-frm]]
==== Explicit-`frm` intrinsics

The explicit-`frm` intrinsics contain the `frm` operand which indicates the rounding mode (`frm`) ^10^ control. The floating-point intrinsics with the `frm` operand are followed by an `_rm` suffix in the function name.

> The `frm` operand is required to be an integer constant expression. The compiler should implement the following enum that maps to the defined rounding mode values under RISC-V ISA Manual Table 8.1 ^9^.

Reviewer 3: there was a "integer constant expression" → "constant integer expression" change in another place, should it be here too?

NOTE: Pseudo intrinsics mentioned under <<pseudo-intrinsics>> do not map to real vector intsructions. Therefore these intrinsics are not affected by the policy setting, nor do they have intrinsic variants of the suffixes listed above.

=== The `vd` parameters in the intrinsics

Intrinsics whose computation is relevant to value held in `vd` have a passthrough operand in them. The following list enumerates the intrinsics that has a passthrough operand. Please see the appendix for the exact prototypes of these intrinsics.

- Intrinsics with tail-undisturbed (`vta=0`)
- Intrinsics with mask-undisturbed (`vma=0`)
- Intrinsics representing Vector Multiply-Add Operations ^13^
- Intrinsics representing Vector Slideup Instructions ^24^

[[explicit-naming-scheme]]
=== Explicit (Non-overloaded) naming scheme

In general, the intrinsics are encoded as the following. The intrinsics under this naming scheme are the "non-overloaded intrinsics", which in parallel we have the "overloaded intrinsics" defined under <<implicit-naming-scheme>>.

The naming rules is the following.

```
__riscv_{V_INSTRUCTION_MNEMONIC}_{OPERAND_MNEMONIC}_{RETURN_TYPE}_{ROUND_MODE}_{POLICY}{(...)
```

> * `OPERAND_MNEMONIC` are like `vv`, `vx`, `vs`, `vvm`, `vxm`

Reviewer 2: I understand `vle` and `vse` also include the case `v`?

* `RETURN_TYPE` depends on whether the return type of the vector instruction is a mask register...
** For intrinsics that represents instructions with a non-mask destination register:
*** `EEW` is one of `i8 | i16 | i32 | i64 | u8 | u16 | u32 | u64 | f16 | f32 | f64`.
*** `EMUL` is one of `m1 | m2 | m4 | m8 | mf2 | mf4 | mf8`.
*** <<type-system>> explains the limited enumeration of EEW, LEUL pair.
** For intrinsics that represent intrinsics with a mask destination register:
*** `RETURN_TYPE` is one of `b1 | b2 | b4 | b8 | b16 | b32 | b64`, which is derived from the ratio `EEW`/`EMUL`.
* `V_INSTRUCTION_MNEMONIC` are like `vadd`, `vfmacc`, `vsadd`.
* `ROUND_MODE` is the `_rm` suffix mentioned in <<explicit-frm>>. Other intrinsics do not have this suffix.
* `POLICY` are enumerated under <<policy-and-masked-naming-scheme>>.

The general naming scheme is not sufficient to express intrinsics. The exceptions are enumerated in the proceeding section <<explicit-exception-naming>>.

[[explicit-exception-naming]]
=== Exceptions in the explicit (non-overloaded) naming scheme

This section enumerates the exceptions in the explicit (non-overloaded) naming scheme.

> ==== Scalar move instructions

Reviewer 2: I think for consistency the listings here should use `___riscv__vmv_x_s_...` instead of `vmv_x_s_...`.

Same for `vredsum_vs_...` below.

[[implicit-naming-scheme]]
=== Implicit (Overloaded) naming scheme

> The implicit (overloaded) interface aims to provide a generic interfaces taking values of different EEW and EMUL as the input. Therefore the implicit intrinsics hide the EEW and EMUL encoded in the function name. The `_rm` prefix for explicit-`frm` intrinsics (<<control-of-frm>>) is also hidden. The intrinsics under this scheme are the "overloaded intrinsics", which in parallel we have the "non-overloaded intrinsics" defined under <<explicit-naming-scheme>>.

Reviewer 3: "generic interfaces" → "generic interface"

[[implicit-naming-scheme]]
=== Implicit (Overloaded) naming scheme

> The implicit (overloaded) interface aims to provide a generic interfaces taking values of different EEW and EMUL as the input. Therefore the implicit intrinsics hide the EEW and EMUL encoded in the function name. The `_rm` prefix for explicit-`frm` intrinsics (<<control-of-frm>>) is also hidden. The intrinsics under this scheme are the "overloaded intrinsics", which in parallel we have the "non-overloaded intrinsics" defined under <<explicit-naming-scheme>>.

Reviewer 2: This is purely style, so feel free to leave the text as is: I'd replace the uses of hide/hidden with omit/omitted.

- Intrinsics with input arguments that are all scalar types and scalar types alone (e.g. unmasked vector load instruction intrinsics, `vmv.s.x`)
- Intrinsics with `vl` as the only argument (e.g. `vmclr`, `vmset`, `vid`)
- Intrinsics with vector boolean input(s), returning a vector non-boolean vector type (e.g. `viota`)

[[type-system]]
== Type system

The intrinsics are designed to be strongly-typed. The intrinsics provide `vreinterpret` intrinsics to help users go across the strongly-typed scheme if necessary.

Non-mask (integer and floating-point) data types have SEW and LMUL encoded. 

[[integer-type]]
=== Integer types

Integer types have EEW and EMUL encoded into the type. The first row describes the EMUL and the first column describes the data type and element width of the scalar type.

Type with bold font is only available when `ELEN >= 64` (that is, unavailable under `Zve32*` and require at least `Zve64x`).

.Integer types
[options="autowidth,header",float="center",align="center",cols="<1,<2,<2,<2,<2,<2,<2,<2"]
|===

> | Types | EMUL=1/8 | EMUL=1/4 | EMUL=1/ 2 | EMUL=1 | EMUL=2 | EMUL=4 | EMUL=8

Reviewer 2: In the table, I wonder if rather than using bold face for the types unavailable under Zve32* we could use a small marker such as ᵃ (e.g. maybe using a superscript `^a^`) after the type and then explain after the table that those types are not available in Zve32.

Bold face makes those type stand out too much but maybe this is not easy to achieve in AsciiDoc. In such case feel free to ignore my suggestion :)

The intrinsics do not alter values held within. Please use `vfcvt/v(f)wcvt/v(f)ncvt` intrinsics if you seek to extend, narrow, or perform real float/interger type conversions for the values.

[[pseudo-vundefined]]
=== `vundefined`
The `vundefined` intrinsics are placeholders for `vset` and `vcreate` to represent unspecified values.

[[pseudo-vget]]
=== `vget`

The `vget` intrinsics allow users to obtain small LMUL values from larger LMUL ones. The `vget` intrinsics also allows users to extract non-tuple (`NFIELD=1`) types from tuple (`NFIELD>1`) types after segment load intrinsics.

The intrinsics do not map to any real instruction. Whether if the implementation will generate vector move instructions is an optimization issue.

[[pseudo-vset]]
=== `vset`

The `vset` intrinsics allow users to combine small LMUL values into larger LMUL ones. The `vset` intrinsics also allows users to combine non-tuple (`NFIELD=1`) types to tuple (`NFIELD>1`) types for segment store intrinsics.

The intrinsics do not map to any real instruction. Whether if the implementation will generate vector move instructions is an optimization issue.

[[pseudo-vlmul_trunc]]
=== `vlmul_trunc`

> The `vlmul_trunc` intrinsics are syntactic sugars that essentially have the same semantic as `vget` with `idx=0`.

Reviewer 2: This is style probably: the "essentially" may suggest that there is some slight difference (even if small). If the semantics is exactly the same due to the syntactic sugar nature of those intrinsics, I'd drop the word.

=== Bookkeeping of configurations

Control of `vl`, `vtype`, `vxrm`, and `frm` is not directly exposed to the user. The implementation is responsible for setting the correct values into these CSRs to achieve the expected semantics of the intrinsic functions with respect to the conventions defined in the ISA specification ^0^ and ABI specification ^9^.

=== Strided load/store with stride of 0

The specification mentions ^15^ that the strided load/store instruction with a stride of 0 could have different behaviors, performing all memory accesses or fewer memory operations. Since needing all memory accesses isn't likely to be common, the implementation is allowed to generate fewer memory operations with strided load/store intrinsics.

In other words, the compiler does not guarantee generating the instruction for all memory accesses in strided load/store intrinsics with a stride of 0. If the user needs all memory accesses to be performed, they should use an indexed load/store intrinsics with all zero indices.

=== Leveraging instructions with operand mnemonics of `vi`

> The intrinsics provide variants with operand mnemonics of `vv` and `vx`, but not `vi`. This was an intentional design to reduce the total amount of out-going intrinsics. The implementation is responsible to emit instructions with operand mnemonics of `vi` when an immediate that can be expressed within 5-bit is provided to the intrinsics.

Reviewer 2: This sounds like a mandatory thing. Like if an implementation had to honour this. Is this the intent?

If this wasn't the intent, maybe rephrasing the last statement to something like "It is a quality of implementation issue whether instructions with `vi` operand mnemonics are emitted when an immediate operand can be encoded in the 5-bit field of the a `vi` instruction".

Author: Yes, I think the intent is to not have a `vi` variant and whether or not the compiler is able to recognize 5-bit immediate and use the `vi` instruction is a quality issue.

|===
| Non-tuple Types (NFILED=1) | NFIELD=2   | NFIELD=3    | NFIELD=4     | NFIELD=5     | NFIELD=6   | NFIELD=7 | NFIELD=8
| `vint8m4_t` | `vint8m4x2_t` | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A
| `vuint8m4_t` | `vuint8m4x2_t` | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A
| `vint16m4_t` | `vint16m4x2_t` | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A
| `vuint16m4_t` | `vuint16m4x2_t` | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A
| `vint32m4_t` | `vint32m4x2_t` | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A
| `vuint32m4_t` | `vuint32m4x2_t` | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A
| `vint64m4_t` | `vint64m4x2_t` | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A
| `vuint64m4_t` | `vuint64m4x2_t` | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A
| `vfloat16m4_t` | `vfloat16m4x2_t` | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A
| `vfloat32m4_t` | `vfloat32m4x2_t` | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A
| `vfloat64m4_t` | `vfloat64m4x2_t` | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A | N/A
|===

[[pseudo-intrinsics]]
== Pseudo intrinsics

The intrinsics provide extra utility functions to help users manipulate across the RVV intrinsic types. These functions are called "pseudo intrinsics". These pseudo intrinsics do not represent any real instructions.

[[pseudo-vsetvl]]
=== `vsetvl`

> The `vsetvl` intrinsics return `min(avl, VLMAX)` given the provided element width and LMUL in the suffix. Please refer to how VLMAX is defined in the v-spec ^5^.

Reviewer 3: `min(avl, VLMAX)` doesn't match `vset{i}vl{i}` in the V spec, where for `VLMAX < avx < 2*VLMAX` it can be anything in `[ceil(VLMAX/2), VLMAX]`

Author: Added description to clarify the semantics. Please check again, thank you.

[[pseudo-vsetvlmax]]
=== `vsetvlmax`

The `vsetvl` intrinsics return `VLMAX` given the provided element width and LMUL in the suffix. Please refer to how VLMAX is defined in the v-spec ^5^.

[[pseudo-vreinterpret]]
=== `vreinterpret`

The `vreinterpret` intrinsics are provided for users to go across the strongly-typed scheme. The intrinsic is limited to conversion between types operating upon the same number of registers.

[[pseudo-vundefined]]
=== `vundefined`
The `vundefined` intrinsics are placeholders for `vset` and `vcreate` to represent agnostic values.

[[pseudo-vget]]
=== `vget`

> The `vget` intrinsics allow users to get smaller LMUL values from larger LMUL ones .The `vget` intrinsics also allows users to extract non-tuple (`NFIELD=1`) types from tuple (`NFIELD>1`) types after segment load intrinsics.

Reviewer 3: "ones .The" → "ones. The"

== Programming Notes

=== The `vd` parameters in the intrinsics

Intrinsics whose computation is relevant to value held in `vd` have a passthrough operand in them. The following list enumerates the intrinsics that has a passthrough operand. Please see the appendix for the exact prototypes of these intrinsics.

- Intrinsics with tail-undisturbed (`vta=0`)
- Intrinsics with mask-undisturbed (`vma=0`)
- Intrinsics representing Vector Multiply-Add Operations ^13^
- Intrinsics representing Vector Slideup Instructions ^24^

For intrinsics with no `vd` operand, the compiler is free to pick any register as the destination register.

=== Assumption of `vstart=0` for intrinsics users.

> As the v-spec has mentioned:
> 
> > The vstart CSR is writable by unprivileged code, but non-zero vstart values may cause vector instructions to run substantially slower on some implementations, so vstart should not be used by application programmers.
> 
> The RVV intrinsics are designed for application users. The intrinsics will perform the semantic of vector instructions under `vstart=0`.

Reviewer: Personally, I think portability (not performance) is a stronger rationale to hide `vstart` from the intrinsics API.

```suggestion

The `vstart` CSR is currently not exposed to the intrinsics programmer, 
and the intrinsics have the semantics of `vstart = 0`.
Support for positive `vstart` values is implementation defined,
thus portable application software should not set `vstart > 0`.
```

Author: Good point. Updated the note, thank you.
